[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What was it like, Jim,
growing up being Jim Kwik
growing up in New York?
>> I mean, I like
sharing my story.
I'm more excited
about teaching stuff.
>> I know.
>> OK, so this is the challenge
right now is I can talk about--
>> Teaching
>> --motivation, and ideas, and
habits, and beliefs, and diet,
and breathing, and
routines, and everything.
But talk about myself, it just--
>> You're a teacher.
>> And it probably came
because, you know, that injury.
You know, it's one
of those things,
where you know one
incident in your life
could change everything.
It was like a big
inflection point.
And so I remember
one day, we were in--
I was in kindergarten.
And there was this noise
outside the window.
And we're in kindergarten.
We're like this tall, right?
And we can't see out
the window at all.
But the teacher says, wow,
there are fire trucks outside.
And I remember I
just lit up when
I heard this thing
about fire trucks,
because I lived
by a fire station.
And I saw them do
amazing things.
Because I felt like they
were real life heroes,
like superheroes.
And I couldn't see
outside the window.
And all the kids started
grabbing their chairs
and putting it by the window to
be able to see the fire trucks.
And I grabbed my chair.
I was excited.
And I bring it over
to the windowsill.
And there's this big
iron grate radiator
dividing the window and such.
And you had to be very careful.
So I'm just they're kind of
like tipping down a little bit.
And I remember when I finally
got to see my heroes there.
My face lit up.
I mean, it was such a good day.
And then about a split
second after that,
one of the other children
grabbed my chair,
so that they could see
outside the window.
And I went face first, head
first, right into the radiator.
And I don't remember a
lot after that moment.
The way my parents
describe it I was bleeding.
And I was rushed
to the hospital.
And they said this.
My mother said I
was never the same
after that in terms of
my personality and such.
And where it really showed
up in school was my learning.
I had these learning
difficulties.
Teachers would have to repeat
themselves over, and over,
and over again.
And then I would
pretend I understood.
But I didn't really understand.
I had very challenged focus.
My concentration was
really compromised.
I had a very poor memory.
I couldn't retain information.
And the biggest
thing where I felt
like I was the most
inadequate was reading.
You know, all the other kids--
remember when you would
get around in the circles
and you would pass
around that book
and you have to read out loud?
And I remember that book getting
closer, and closer, and closer.
And every single time it got
passed on to another child,
I got a little bit more nervous.
And my heart starts racing.
And I was perspiring.
Because I knew when
that book came to me,
I wouldn't be able to
read like the other kids.
And finally, when
the book came to me,
I would look at the book.
And I just saw letters.
But they didn't
mean anything to me.
And then I didn't know what
was wrong with me at the time.
And it's really a challenge
when you're a child facing
these kind of struggles.
Because you feel like
you're not enough.
And you feel like
something's the matter.
And I remember the first
time this happened.
I would take the book.
And I would look at my teacher.
And she would just look at me.
And there was this encouraging,
like you could do it.
But I really-- I couldn't do it.
And I would take the book.
And I would just pass
it on to the next child
and would have to hold back
my tears at that moment.
And it actually took me an
extra three to four years just
to learn how to read.
And I actually taught myself
how to read by reading
comic books late at night.
I remember my
uncle, my aunt, they
gave me comic books for certain
occasions, like birthdays
and Christmas and such.
And at night when my parents
thought I was sleeping,
I would take a flashlight.
And I would be
underneath the covers.
And I'd be reading these and
not really understanding it.
But something about the
illustrations of the comic book
heroes, something
about good versus evil,
something about making a
difference, that one person can
make a difference,
something about the hope
and its theme of the
superhero journey
brought the words to life.
And I started to understand
for the very first time.
And my favorite superheroes
growing up actually
were the X-Men.
The X-Men, not because
they were the strongest.
It's because they didn't fit in.
They were the mutants.
They were the outcasts.
And I felt growing up with
these learning challenges
that I didn't fit in.
And I felt like I was
one of those people
without the superpowers.
I remember when I found out,
one of the big highlights when
I was reading this
comic book was
that the superhero school, the
X-Men School for the Gifted
run by Professor
X, Charles Xavier,
actually resided right there
in Westchester, New York.
And that's where I lived.
And so I remember
every weekend when
I was about eight
or nine years old,
I would ride my bicycle
around my neighborhood.
And I wanted to
find that school.
Because I wanted to run away.
I wanted to run away to find my
school, to find my superpowers,
to find my super friends.
And really, I remember
a defining moment
when I was nine years old.
I remember that a teacher
was talking to another adult
thinking I wasn't
paying attention,
or maybe thinking that I wasn't
smart enough to understand
what she was saying.
And she pointed
right at me and said
that is the boy with
the broken brain.
That's the boy with
And I remember how
hard that hit me.
You know, children
understand more than you
think that they understand.
And I think adults have
to be very careful,
especially around children.
Because their external voice
becomes their internal voice.
And I remember always
referring back to that moment
all through all through school.
Whenever I didn't do
well, I was like, oh, it's
because I'm broken.
It's because I'm different.
It's because my
mind doesn't work
like everybody else's does.
And when I was
growing up also, I
had this sense of
responsibility.
Because I'm the oldest
of three children.
And I wanted to be a good
role model for my younger
brother and my younger sister.
So I had that pressure.
And I really just wanted
to make my family proud.
The challenge was I just
wouldn't-- it's funny.
Because you grow up
and you feel like
that you have this
potential inside of you.
And you wonder like,
it's so unfair that you
have to work so much harder.
When's it going to
actually show up?
But you feel that
specialness inside.
And I had so much
love with my family.
They're not the wealthiest
or the healthiest or the most
spiritual.
But they're just very
kind, good people.
And so I wanted to
make them proud.
And I remember I had
one opportunity back
in high school, because
I was failing out
of English, which was one
of my hardest subjects,
because I couldn't
read and everything
having to do with words was
a very big challenge for me.
And my teacher during a student
parent teacher conference,
they pulled my parents
aside, because I
was this kind of special case.
And the teacher offered
us an opportunity
to be able to redeem my
grades and said, OK, Jim, I
know you have this
potential inside of you.
And I know.
We see how hard that you work.
And so I'm going to give
you a special assignment.
I want you to do some
research and write
a report on this genius, this
genius named Leonardo da Vinci.
And I had never heard of
Leonardo da Vinci before.
And she said that if I
could do this book report,
then she'll count
that as extra credit.
And I could pass this class.
And I remember seeing
my mother and my father.
And they had hopes saying,
Jim, you could do this.
This is something that
you really could do.
And so I really dived in
like I never had before.
I mean, I always worked hard,
because I had that discipline
from my parents.
But I put everything into this.
And I would spend
all this time right
after school going to
the public library.
And I'd be the first one there.
I'd be the last one to leave.
And I did all this research
on this incredible Renaissance
man.
He was an artist.
And he was an architect.
And he was a scientist.
And he could juggle.
He could do all
these amazing things.
And I was like, wow.
I was like, I wish I could
be like this person one day.
And so finally, I
finished the report.
And my parents helped me
to have it professionally
really nicely bound.
And I was so proud of this.
And I remember going
to school that day.
I put it into my backpack.
And I had it with me
all through the day.
And I couldn't
wait for that class
to be able to turn
it into the teacher.
And when we get to the class,
at the end of the class, when
we had only a handful of minutes
left, and the teacher said,
OK, class, we have a
special surprise right now.
Jim, I'd like you to come
in front of the class
and talk about your book report,
talk about Leonardo da Vinci.
And one of the side
effects of being labeled
the boy with the broken
brain is you don't really
connect to people.
I was already introverted.
But I was also painfully shy.
I didn't connect
with a lot of people.
I was bullied back in school.
And when the teacher said I
had to go in front of the class
and present on
it, I mean, I felt
like my heart just stopped.
And I was perspiring.
And it didn't only stop.
It just felt like it was
going a million miles an hour
at the same time.
And I was so petrified.
And I go to the teacher.
And I remember
walking up to her.
And I just whispered
into here ears.
And I said, I didn't do it.
I didn't do the book report.
And she was just shocked.
I remember looking at her face.
And it just ended like that.
And when the class
left, I remember
I was the last one there,
because I had to get--
you know, compose myself.
And then when I left,
I took my book report.
And I actually put it into
the trash and along with it
I felt like a lot of my
hopes, and my dreams,
and my potential was going
into the garbage also as well.
So that was a real
defining moment in my life.
Because it's, you
know, you always
hope like when you watch movies
that the main character is
going to step up.
And they're going to surprise
everybody and reach down.
And then their life is
never going to be the same.
But I felt like that was
another example, where there
was something that was wrong.
>> So after such
traumatic incidences,
it's difficult to
look back on it.
But I mean, so
many children will
be able to relate with
this story especially.
Because the shyness, not
being able to speak up.
You're really in a discovering
phase of finding your voice.
And if you're labeled
as broken, you
internalize that
as a belief system.
But you met a gentleman--
I forget who you referenced--
who challenged you
with a few questions.
And that really helped you
transition out of we'll
hang on a victim
mentality to more of like,
I can be in control of
my destiny somewhat here.
Who was this person?
And what did he say to you?
>> So all of high
school was this.
It was my struggles.
I would work so much
harder than everybody else.
And I always thought
it was unfair,
because my grades
didn't reflect that.
But I was lucky enough
to get into a university.
And I remember freshman year.
I was like, OK, this is it.
This is my chance right
now to prove to the world,
to prove to myself, to
make my family proud,
that I could be worth something.
And I took all these classes.
And basically, I wanted to--
I thought I was--
I was like, I'm a freshman.
And so I want to
make a fresh start.
And so I took all these
classes ready to achieve.
And I actually did worse.
And things got even
more difficult for me.
And I was ready to quit school.
Because I didn't have the money
as it was to go to college.
And I didn't want to
waste that and waste time.
And so when I told
that to my friend,
my friend was like, Jim,
before you quit school and tell
your parents that
you're leaving,
why don't you come
with me this weekend?
I'm going to visit my
family this weekend,
just get some time away,
get some perspective.
And I found that
perspective really
makes a difference, right?
You change your place or you
change the people you're with,
it gives you a
different point of view.
So I agree to go there.
And I remember
right before dinner,
his father was walking
me around his property.
And they're pretty well to do.
And he asked me this
very innocent question,
which is the worst question that
you could ask me at this time.
He says, Jim, how is school?
And it just hits me.
Because this is what
my whole life is about.
I start crying and
bawling right in front
this complete stranger.
And I tell him my whole story,
how I had a brain injury.
And I don't learn
like everybody else.
And I'm the boy with
the broken brain.
And school is just not for me.
And then he says, Jim,
stop for a minute.
And he looks me
right in the eyes
and asked me this question.
He says, Jim, why
are you in school?
Why are you in school?
What do you want to be?
What do you want to do?
What do you want to have?
What do you want to share?
And honestly, I never
thought about that before.
You know, ask a new question
and you get a new answer, right?
And my focus went there.
And I didn't have a
quick answer for him.
And when I was thinking
about it for a little bit,
I start to answer him.
An he says, stop.
And he pulls out from his back
pocket a diary, like a journal.
And he tears out a few sheets.
And he hands them to me.
And he makes me write down
my answers, my answers of who
I want to be, what I want
to do, what I want to have,
what I want to share
with the world.
And I don't know how
much time went by.
But when I was done, I start
folding up the sheets of paper
to put in my pocket.
And he grabs them
right out of my hand.
And I'm freaking out.
Because I wasn't expecting
anyone to see my dreams,
and my fantasies, my goals.
And he starts reading
them to himself.
And I don't know.
I get so nervous.
And I can literally--
I'm getting-- I get goose
bumps even thinking about it.
Because I don't know what
he's thinking right now.
And when he's done--
I don't know how much time
went by-- but he looks at me.
He says, Jim, you are this
close to every single thing
on that list.
And I'm just thinking-- he
spreads his fingers about
a foot apart--
and I'm thinking,
there is no way.
Give me 10 lifetimes, I'm
not going to crack that list.
And he takes his
fingers and he puts them
to the side of my head,
my temple, right here.
Meaning that between
my ears is the key.
You know, it's my mind.
It's my brain.
And he walks me to
a room of his home
that I've never seen before.
He walks me into a room.
And it's wall to wall, ceiling
to floor covered in books.
I mean, can you imagine like
a library in somebody's home?
So I'm in this
library right now.
And remember, my
associations with books.
I'm a very poor reader, right?
And I'm scared.
I'm phobic of books.
But it would be the
equivalent of someone walking
into a room full of snakes.
But what makes it
worse is he starts
grabbing snakes from the shelf
and starts handing them to me.
And I'm freaking out, because
this is not very comfortable.
And I started looking at
the title of these books.
And they're these biographies
of incredible men and women
throughout history and some very
early personal growth books,
Norman Vincent Peale, "The
Power of Positive Thinking,"
"The Magic of Thinking
Big," "Psycho-Cybernetics,"
"Think and Grow Rich," you know,
all these books on mind set,
the power of the mind.
And he says, Jim, I want you to
read one of these books a week.
And I'm thinking, have you
not heard anything I've said?
I have all of these learning
difficulties and all
these learning problems.
I have so much schoolwork to do.
We have midterms.
And he says, stop.
He's like, Jim,
don't let school get
in the way of your education.
And it just floors me.
I didn't realize at the time
it was a Mark Twain quote.
But I said, you know,
that's really good insight.
And I still, I can't commit
to reading these books,
because I have all
this schoolwork.
And it's a great saying.
But I really can't do it.
I don't want to promise
this and break my promise.
And a very smart
man, what he does
is he reaches into his pocket.
And he pulls out my goals,
my dreams, my bucket list,
if you will.
And this time, he starts reading
every single one of my goals
out loud, all my
dreams out loud.
And something about
hearing your dreams
coming from a stranger's voice,
incanted out into the universe,
it shook my heart.
It shook my spirit and
my soul something fierce.
And a lot of those
things on my list
were things I wanted
to do for my parents
and for my family, things
that they can never afford.
Or even if they could, they
would never do for themselves.
And with that extra motivation--
I think motivation
really is key in terms
of why we do what we
do, especially when it
comes to learning.
So I commit to reading one
book a week with that leverage
and motivation.
And fast forward,
now I'm at school.
And I have a pile
of books that I
have to read for school
and a pile of books
that I want to read that I
promised to read for my life.
And I can't even keep up
with one of those piles.
And so what do I do?
I sacrifice.
I don't eat.
I don't sleep.
I don't exercise.
I don't spend time with friends.
I don't do the things that
would nourish my soul.
Instead, I just
live in the library.
And it's not very
sustainable, right?
And so I end up actually
passing out one night.
And I fall down a
flight of stairs.
And I hit my head again.
And I wake up two days later.
And now, I'm in the hospital.
And at this point,
because I wasn't eating,
I was really wasting away.
I was down to 117 pounds.
I mean, it was a very dark time.
I thought I died.
Maybe part of me--
I mean, it was very-- it
was very hard, difficult.
And when I woke up, another
part of me woke up thinking,
there has to be a better way.
And I'm lying there in
the hospital bed thinking,
what am I going to do?
And when I had that
thought, the nurse
came in with a mug of tea.
And on it had a drawing
of an incredible genius
named Albert Einstein.
And it had a quote
there that we've all
heard before, that we've
all seen in some iteration.
It said, the same
level of thinking
that's created the problem
won't solve the problem.
The same level of thinking
that's created the problem
won't solve the problem.
And it made me ask
a new question.
It made me ask this question
like, what's my problem?
And I came up this
answer saying, well,
I'm a real slow learner.
I learn very slowly.
I have a very slow brain.
Well, how do I think
differently about it?
Well, maybe I can learn
how to learn faster,
learn how to learn.
So I think, how am I going
to learn how to learn?
Well, maybe school.
So I pick up a course bulletin,
looking at all the classes
for next semester.
And I look at all these
hundreds of classes.
And all of them are
classes on what's learned,
math, and history, and
science, and Spanish.
But there were
zero classes on how
to learn, how to think for
yourself, how to be creative,
how to solve problems,
how to actively listen,
how to concentrate and
focus, how to read faster,
how to remember things.
I always thought
back in school it
should have been the fourth
R. They teach you three R's,
reading, writing, arithmetic.
But what about remembering?
What about retention?
What about recall?
Socrates says, learning
is remembering.
There is no learning
without remembering.
So I put my studies aside.
And I make studying my studies.
I wanted to really solve this
riddle about how does my brain
work, so I could work my brain?
How does my memory work,
so I can work my memory?
And I just started studying
positive psychology,
and adult learning theory,
of multiple intelligences,
anything I could get my hands
on on how to unlock this gift.
And an amazing thing happened.
About two months
in this process,
a light switch flipped on.
And I started to understand
things in a different way.
I started to have better
focus, better concentration.
I started to read faster.
I started to be able
to think more clearly.
I had this new life
inside of my mind.
And my grades improved.
But not only that, but my life
started to elevate and improve.
And the reason
why I do what I do
is because I couldn't help
but help other people.
And I remember I was
tutoring this young woman.
She was a freshman.
And she read 30 books
in 30 days, 30 books.
I mean, could you imagine?
I mean, what could you do?
What books would you read if
you read 30 books in 30 days?
And then not only read it,
but actually comprehend it,
retain all that information?
And I wanted to find
out not how she did it.
I wanted to know why she did
it, going back to motivation.
And I found out by asking her.
I found out that her mother
was dying of terminal cancer
and was given only 60 days
to live, just two months.
And the books she was
reading were books on health,
books on wellness,
books on energy.
Because she was determined
to save her mother's life.
And I was just--
you know, I get goosebumps
thinking about it.
I call them truth bumps.
And I just wished
her luck and said I
would say prayers and thoughts.
Six months later, I get a
call from this young lady.
And she's crying.
She's crying, crying.
She can't stop.
Finally, I find out
they're tears of joy,
that her mother not only
survived, but is really
getting better.
Doctors don't know how.
They don't know why.
The doctors called it a miracle.
But her mother attributed
it 100% to the great advice
she got from her
daughter who learned it
from all these books.
And at that moment,
I realized something.
I realized that if
knowledge is power,
learning is your super power,
that if knowledge is power,
learning is your super power.
And it's a super power we all
have available inside of us.
So from that moment,
I dedicated my life
to help people to unlock
those super powers,
their mental super powers,
the modern day super powers.
I talk about
superheroes going back
to the comic books and
my reading disability.
But really, modern
day super heroes--
I'm not talking about
super powers that
allow you to jump,
leap tall buildings
and shoot lasers
out of your eyes.
I mean, modern day super
powers, like your ability
to think clearly, your ability
to have a proper mindset,
your ability to
engineer your habits,
your ability to manage
your own attitude,
your ability to learn faster,
to focus, to concentrate.
Those are the things that
I really get excited about.
That when people step into that
better version of themselves,
the version that they know
could be inside of them,
that version I knew was deep
inside of me all those years,
but I just couldn't unlock
it, I wanted to decode that.
On the theme of superheroes,
I remember one day,
our office gets a call
from 20th Century Fox.
And they wanted me to do
this very special training
for the chairman of Fox
and the executive team.
And I remember going there.
And I was so excited.
Because when I was going through
the hallway to the boardroom,
all these movie
posters were there,
like "Star Wars" and "Avatar"
and all the classics.
And it made me feel like
I was a child again,
that nine-year-old boy.
And I gave one of my
very best trainings
for their executive team.
And then when I was
done, the chairman of Fox
said, Jim, thank you so much.
And he gave me this wonderful
tour of the Fox lot.
And I remember
going on this tour.
And out of the corner my eyes
I see this Wolverine poster.
And I am such a big Hugh
Jackman Wolverine fan.
And I said, I can't wait
for that movie to come out.
And the chairman
picked up his phone.
And then five minutes later,
I'm in the Fox Theater
watching Wolverine fight all
these super ninjas, right?
It was the best
Friday afternoon ever.
And when he comes to
get me afterwards,
he says, how is the movie?
And because I'm still
in that childlike mode,
I just say, oh, you
don't know this.
I tell him my whole story.
I was like, you don't know this.
But when I was a child,
I had a brain injury.
I had all these
learning difficulties.
I was labeled a boy
with a broken brain.
And I taught myself how to read
by reading comic books late
at night.
And my favorite comic
books growing up
were "Wolverine"
and "The X-Men."
And I tell them
the highlight of it
was seeing that the X-Men
school was in Westchester.
I still look for my school
every single weekend.
And he's like, Jim, I didn't
know you like superheroes.
Do you want to go
with me to Comic Con?
And I was just like, what?
And you know Comic Con
is like the largest
gathering of superheroes ever.
And I was like, when is it?
He's like, it's today,
Friday, Saturday, Sunday.
And my mind goes from a
nine-year-old to a 99-year-old.
I started thinking,
oh, there's going
to be traffic going
from LA to San Diego.
I have nothing to wear.
I'm going to wait
in all these lines.
I have all these meetings here.
You know, I talk
my way out of it.
And he stops me and says,
Jim, do you want to go?
Because I'm going tomorrow.
And I was like, oh, I
totally want to go with you.
So the next morning,
he picks me up.
And instead of driving to San
Diego, we get onto his plane.
And when we get on to his
plane, waiting on the plane
is the entire cast of X-Men.
I mean, I just flip out, I mean,
Hugh Jackman, Patrick Stewart.
And I don't even see Hugh
Jackman and Patrick Stewart.
I see Wolverine and Professor X.
And I'm sitting in between
Jennifer Lawrence and Halle
Berry going to Comic Con.
I mean, it's such
an amazing day.
When we come back to
LA after that day,
the chairman asked
me how my day went.
And I was like,
this was incredible.
Thank you so much.
And he says, Jim, I have
something else for you.
I was like, I don't
want anything else.
What can I do for you?
He's like, the cast
really loved you.
How would you like to go on set?
I was like, what do you mean?
He's like, we have
another 30 days
of filming the new
X-Men movie in Montreal.
How would you like to go?
And I have never been
on a film set before.
And I'm acting like
I'm nine-years-old
and thinking, yeah,
yes, I want to go.
Please take me.
And I was like, what
can I do for you?
And he says, Jim, do the
same thing you did for us,
share with them
your superpowers.
Teach them how to
speed read scripts, how
to memorize their lines,
how to be focused on set.
And I said, I could
absolutely do that.
So the next morning, we're
on what they call the X jet.
And I get on this plane
with the cast of the X-Men.
I'm sharing them my brain
tips for learning faster
and achieving more.
And when we get on set,
it's incredible coincidence
that the scene that
they're filming
takes place in the X-Men
School for the Gifted.
And I'm there as a
nine-year-old boy
seeing my superheroes come
to life right in front of me.
And that's not
even the best part.
When I go home, there's
a package waiting for me.
And it's the size
of a television set.
And I open it up.
And it's this photograph
of me and the entire cast
of the X-Men.
But even better than that is
the note from the chairman.
It says this.
Jim, thank you so much for
sharing your superpowers
with all of us.
I know you've been looking
for superheroes school
since you were a child.
Here's your class photo.
And-- and I felt like
I went full circle.
You know, I've been looking
for my school my entire life.
And you know, when I
found my gift of unlocking
these super brains,
you know, that I
was able to teach and share
and learn from my superheroes.
>> Wow.
Wow.
What an incredible story.
I mean, when you think about
helping someone transition from
being someone that thinks they
cannot learn to being someone
who has the capability to
learn, do you often find that
it's limiting beliefs
that are the main,
first step that
hold people back?
And how can people
identify if they
do have any limiting beliefs?
>> When I'm onstage, I do
this interactive exercise,
where I have everybody stand up
and point with the right hand
and turn clockwise to see
how far they could go.
And then I have them
visualize themselves doing it,
but this time going two
times, and three times,
and four times around.
And then when they're done with
this visualization exercise,
I have them stand up
again and point forward
with their right hand and turn
how far they can now turn.
And across the board, it's
about 25%-50% further.
So the question I
ask them is this.
Were you physically
capable of turning that
far the first time?
And all of them
say, yes, of course.
Like, nobody took a yoga class
when everyone's eyes were
closed or anything like that.
I said, where's the limitation?
And people say, they come to
the conclusion, it's my mind,
where limitations
are in my beliefs.
And I ask, well, how
many beliefs do we have?
And people say, well, there are
countless, countless beliefs.
And here's the thing.
All behavior is belief driven.
If you want to create a new
result in your life going back
to be, do, have, share, if you
want to be able to share more
and you want to be
able to have more,
you need to be able to do more.
But in order for you
to be able to do more,
you have to believe
that you can, right?
Because if you believe
you can or believe
you can't, either
way, you're right.
Henry Ford said that.
Wayne Dyer says, it's not you'll
believe it when you see it.
It's you'll see it
when you believe it.
And success really is
an inside out process
of taking the invisible
and making it visible.
Even athletes do this, right?
They use visualization to be
able to reach their goals,
to be able to change
their belief system.
So for example, Roger Bannister,
what did Roger Bannister
do in 1954?
He broke the four minute mile.
Throughout human history,
no one could run a mile
less than four minutes.
Because the belief back
then was the human heart
wasn't able to sustain
a sub four minute mile.
It would explode in your chest.
And you would die.
And now, I'm a runner, right?
You know, with a name like
Kwik, I had to be a runner.
And that wouldn't keep me from
running a four minute mile.
That would keep me
from running period.
I would never want to do that.
But the interesting thing
was he would actually
visualize himself
crossing the finish line.
And in his mind, he
would see the clock.
And it says 3:59.
Because he knows that it has
to happen in here before it
happens out there.
Now, that was an
interesting part.
But the other part that
I found interesting
was what happened after that.
Nobody could run a
sub four minute mile.
All of a sudden,
one person does it.
What happens over
the next few years?
Dozens and dozens
of people start
running a sub four minute mile.
Now, was there a big advancement
in shoe technology, training
methodology, nutritional
supplementation?
No.
Where was the change?
A change in belief.
Because all of a sudden,
one person could do it,
then it gave permission
for everybody else.
It shook up that
limiting belief.
And that's why
it's so important.
So when we have
negative thoughts,
people come to me all the
time and say, you know, Jim,
I'm just getting too old.
You know, I'm very forgetful.
You know, this is
biological, right?
I'm just not smart enough.
I always tell people this.
It's that if you fight
for your limitations,
you get to keep them.
If you argue for your
limits, you get to keep them.
And that self talk
makes a difference.
I remember I was
preparing for a marathon.
And I like to read.
I'm an avid reader.
And I was reading this
book on the psychology
of running a marathon.
And this one chapter
said this verbatim,
because I'm a memory expert.
It said this.
"Your brain is like
a supercomputer.
And your self talk is
a program it will run.
So if you tell yourself you're
not good at remembering names,
you will not remember the name
of the next person you meet.
Because you program your
supercomputer not to."
So when it comes to your
self talk and your belief,
you always need to be able
to stand guard to your mind.
Because here's the thing.
Your mind is always
eavesdropping
on your self talk.
Your mind is always
eavesdropping
on your self talk.
And it becomes a program that
the supercomputer will run.
So when people want
to make a change
or they want to create a
transformation in their life,
most people look at this level
of behavior, the behavior.
They want to be able
to stop smoking.
Or they want to be
able to meditate.
able to journal,
make it a habit, and
not self sabotage,
or not put it off,
or not procrastinate.
Usually though,
they try to force it
on the behavioral level.
But there are other levels also.
These are the levels of
transformation, if you will.
Right above that
level, above behavior
are capabilities, capabilities.
Because in order to be
able to do this behavior,
you need the capabilities,
or the skills, the habits,
the training, to be able
to do that behavior.
Somebody could say they
want a behavior of speed
reading every single day,
or remembering names.
But the capabilities
are the actual training
that give you that ability to
be able to do that behavior.
Now, above this
level of capabilities
is this level of beliefs and
values, beliefs, and values.
And what is that?
That basically says
that if you want
to do this behavior
of let's say,
remembering people's names,
because a lot of people
have trouble remembering
names, yes, maybe you
have the capabilities.
But if you don't have the
belief that you could do it,
maybe you have a belief
like you're too old,
maybe you have a
belief like oh I'm
not smart enough, or a
belief that I'm just not
good at remembering
names, that would keep you
from doing the behavior.
The other part of it is
besides belief, are values.
These are the values.
These are the things that
you hold the most important.
And if you don't think that it's
important to remember people's
names, the value will keep you
from doing the actual behavior.
Now, above beliefs and
values is another level.
This is the level of
identity, identity.
And the level of identity
is the level of I am.
They say these are
the most powerful
two words in the language.
Because anything
that comes after that
becomes your destiny.
And here's the thing.
Someone can create
a behavior and say,
I have this new behavior
of stop smoking.
I want to stop smoking.
But if their identity
is that of a smoker,
they won't make that change.
Somebody here could
say, oh, I want
to be able to remember
things better.
That's the behavior.
But their identity is
I'm a forgetful person.
That will keep them from
making that transformation.
And then finally, below
this level of behavior
is this level of
environment, environment.
This is really like where
you're spending your time.
And so somebody can
have the behavior
is let's say, reading
every single day.
But if they're in an
environment with no books,
that's not going to
allow them to do that.
If they're in an environment,
maybe there's no lighting.
They won't be able to do that.
Or maybe that they're
reading at a specific time
and it's too late
and they're tired.
That's going to keep them
from executing the behavior.
So these are two levels
of transformation.
So when I'm looking to make
a change with somebody,
a change in behavior,
if they're getting
stuck they're, always
look at the other areas.
Now, here's the magic part.
Really when it comes down to
it, questions are the answer.
And when you think about school,
there were five questions,
six questions if you
will, five W's and one H.
So if you're looking at these
levels of transformation,
identity answers
the question of who.
This is the who.
The beliefs and values
answers the question, why?
The level of capabilities
answers the question, how?
The level of behavior is
the question of, what?
And finally, this
level of environment
answers the question,
where and when?
So when I hear people get
stuck on a specific area,
I'm listening for how
they're describing it.
So they say something
like, I can never do that.
And they emphasize I. I
know it's an identity issue.
You know, I can never do that.
Do is a level of capabilities.
>> This is fascinating.
This is really,
you've chunked down
the process of helping
people understand
where their blocks are.
>> Yeah, because I think
these distinctions are very
important.
Because most people
can't change something
unless they articulate it and
they have a self-awareness.
I think self-awareness
is a superpower.
And I think really
when it comes down
to it, what does it take to be
truly fulfilled, truly happy?
I think it comes
down to two things.
You have to have the curiosity
to want to know yourself,
to really have that
self-awareness,
to do the deep study
in terms of who you are
in these levels, your
identities, your beliefs,
your values, and so on.
But just having the curiosity
to know yourself is not enough.
Once you have that, you
have to have the courage
to be yourself.
You need the courage to
be able to be that person.
So many people will go
through the efforts.
And they'll read lots of books.
And they'll meditate.
And they'll journal.
And they'll know themself.
But it's a different level
to be able to actually
be that person, when especially
we live in this world, where
we have expectations from
others, our peer groups.
You know, we're not
walking our path.
We're walking that
of our parents,
or that of our friends, or with
the Joneses, or our neighbor.
And we put all this energy
into these different bodies.
And it's like this
energy that people
feel so fatigued nowadays
in today's modern society.
They're so depleted.
And part of it is they
put this energy out,
this self-image
of like, oh, this
is who they want to
project to the world.
And then there's
another image here
that they fear who they are.
This is the image that they're
scared they really are.
And then this other image
is really who they are.
But their energy is dissipated
in these three areas.
And you wonder why people
are so tired all the time
or they lose their passion,
or they lose that drive.
>> Do you find often when
you're working with people that
people's lives and ambitions and
goals are driven out of fear,
as opposed to out of love or
something they're passionate
about?
Because a lot of
people that I've
spoken to have gone
through transformation
have spent a big part of their
life chasing a goal or an idea
that wasn't theirs.
And then somehow, they stumbled
across their superpower.
And they feel aligned, on
purpose, fulfilled, happy,
driven beyond imagination.
Everything's there.
They lined up.
But it might have taken them
30 years to discover that.
How is it that people set
goals and ideas around
from a place of fear as opposed
to a place of love and passion?
>> So when I was
going on my journey,
my inspiration really
was my desperation.
I think a lot of it was this
idea that I could be better.
And I could make
my family proud.
But another part of my drive was
this fear that I wasn't enough.
And if you feel like
you're not enough,
you're not going to be
loved, and you're not
going to be protected.
And that was a fear
based approach.
And we get motivated by
both of these things.
Now, when I talk
about my desperation,
it came through difficulty,
difficult times.
I feel like that when
we have difficult times,
that that difficulty
could either define us.
It could diminishes.
Or it could develop us.
We hear a lot about
post-traumatic stress.
And I've had my share.
And everybody has their
own set of challenges
in their own life.
But we don't hear a lot about
this other area of study
called post-traumatic growth,
post-traumatic growth.
This is where you come
through difficulty.
You come through adversity.
And on the other side, you would
never wish those situations
for anybody.
But you also wouldn't
change it for yourself.
That because you went through
those challenging times,
it changed you, that you
found a deeper meaning.
You found a new strength.
You found your mission.
You found your purpose going
through those difficult times.
I don't know a lot
of people in life
that have a strength that had
easy lives, really easy lives.
Because through
our struggles, we
find sometimes our superpowers.
You see, my two big
challenges growing up
were learning and
public speaking.
And now, I think the universe
has a sense of humor.
Because what I do for
my mission, my Dharma?
Is I public speak on this
thing called learning
almost every single day.
And so I would say that
there's that phrase
that if you want to make God
laugh, tell her your plans.
And so this wasn't my plan.
But this is my responsibility.
And when we're talking
about fear, a lot of people
have a fear of responsibility.
I remember I was
going to dinner.
I got to introduce two of
my modern day superheroes
together for dinner.
It was Stan Lee and
Richard Branson.
And I remember in
the back of the car,
I was asking Stan I was
like, you've created
this pantheon of superheroes.
Who's your favorite?
And he says, Jim, it's Iron Man.
And he said, Jim,
who's your favorite?
And I said mine is Spider Man.
Because Stan had this
great Spider Man tie.
And when I said Spider
Man, he looked right at me.
He said, Jim, with great power
comes great responsibility.
And we all have
heard that before.
We don't even remember
where we heard it.
But my mind inverts things.
I have a slight dyslexia
growing up as a kid.
I still kind of move
things around in my mind.
And I said, you know,
Stan, you're right.
With great power comes
great responsibility.
And the opposite is also true.
With great responsibility
comes great power.
That when we take
responsibility for something,
we have great power
to make things better.
But I think that a lot of
people fear that responsibility.
Because they feel like
responsibility is a jailer.
By having extra responsibility,
it puts you in a prison.
You have to have discipline.
But if you can't
get yourself to do
the things that you need to do,
then you're really in prison.
If you can't get yourself
to meditate, or journal,
or eat the right
foods, or exercise,
or prime your mind every
single day, to create not only
your to do list, but also your
to be list, your to feel list,
if you will, your
gratitude list.
You have your vision board.
But where's your
gratitude board?
Because gratitude
rewires your brain.
So if somebody wants to
level up their learning
and level up their life, really
uncover their deep potential,
really a big part of it comes
down to routines and habits.
Because anywhere from 40% to
60% of our day is spent doing
routines, doing
things unconsciously.
And so I believe that
first, we create our habits.
And then our habits create us.
We create our habits.
And then our habits
create us right back.
But how many people
actually sat down
and designed the
habits that are really
going to help them live
their fullest potential?
The habits that are
most important to me
are those habits first
thing in the morning.
Because as they say, if
you want to win the day,
you have to win that
first hour of the day.
And so every single morning,
I have specific habits
to really jumpstart my
mind, to conquer my mind,
to master my mind, if you will.
Because that's going to
control everything else.
So for example,
the first thing I
do when I wake up in the
morning is I remember my dreams.
I have a process for
remembering all my dreams.
And you're like, Jim,
what does that have
to do with human potential
and being your best
and being a lead
mental performer?
Well, a lot of people
don't know this,
but you go through your
day learning all day.
You go through your day
trying to figure out
challenges as an
entrepreneur, or as a parent.
And here's the thing.
Your brain doesn't
shut off at night.
If anything, your brain
is more active at night.
So many times, you'll come
up with answers at night.
You'll come up with solutions.
You come up with inventions,
works of art, in your mind.
The challenge is when
you wake up the next day,
you forget those things.
And that's a big challenge.
So for example, a
lot of people don't
know a lot of
literature, culture,
art was created in dream states.
So for example, Mary Shelley
came up with "Frankenstein"
in her dreams.
Isn't that amazing?
Paul McCartney came up with
"Yesterday" in his dream.
Elais Howard created the
sewing machine in his dream.
I mean, it's absolutely amazing.
The periodic table came
to a chemist in his dream.
And so what are you
dreaming about late at night
that you forget about
first thing in the morning?
So you want to be able
to remember your dreams.
The second thing
I do is when you
talk about habits and routines
and being at your best,
is I make my bed.
And you're like, Jim, what does
that have to do with anything?
Make your bed?
And the reason why is twofold.
Number one, I believe
how you do anything
is how you do everything.
How you do anything is
how you do everything.
And success breeds success.
And why not start with
a win that only takes
you one or two minutes
to be able to do that?
And the other reason
you do this is,
how wonderful is the
feeling that you come back
after a hard day's work and
you come back to success,
you come back to your bed?
So you go full circle.
Another thing I do every single
morning in terms of habits,
routine, is I brush my teeth
with the opposite hand,
with the opposite hand.
You're like, Jim, what does
that have to do with anything?
Why would you use
your opposite hand?
It's more difficult.
That is the reason why.
Because you train yourself.
How you do anything is
how you do everything.
So you to get comfortable
being uncomfortable.
Because if you put limits--
Bruce Lee has this
phrase that says,
if you put limits
on any of your life,
then it's going to pervade
other areas of your life.
So I want to challenge
myself constantly.
But the other reason I use
the opposite hand is it
engages the opposite
side of your brain.
And it actually
builds brain muscles.
Because as your body
moves, your brain grooves.
They did a study at
Oxford University,
where they had jugglers.
They found jugglers
actually had bigger brains.
They created more white
matter in their brains.
Because as you move
your body, it actually
stimulates different
parts of your brain.
Because it's not just the
brain body connection.
It's a body brain connection.
And that's what
science is telling us.
Another thing I do every single
morning is I take cold showers.
And you're thinking, Jim,
I loved this up to now.
Why do you say cold showers?
But we know cold therapy is
something that's very powerful.
A lot of high achievers do that,
including [INAUDIBLE],, right?
Because it resets your
nervous system and lowers
inflammation in your body.
So whether it's a cold
shower or cryo therapy,
you know, you hit your knee.
And what do you do?
You put ice on it.
Because it reduces the
swelling and inflammation.
Same thing with your
body and your brain.
The other reason why
I take cold showers,
besides the
physiological effects,
is a psychological effects.
What do I mean by that?
How you do anything is
how you do everything.
But when you put yourself in
difficult situation, something
that's uncomfortable, but
still not life threatening,
and you push yourself.
Because a lot of times in
that shower, even to this day,
I'm like, I want
to get out of this.
My body is screaming,
get out, get out of this!
But when you calm yourself and
you bring centeredness to it
and you resist that,
then all of a sudden,
that pervades other
areas of your life.
It allows you to
have more confidence.
It gives you more
resilience and more grit
when you're at your
job, when you're onstage
teaching something, when you
need to be there confidently
with your child.
That really shows up.
So you do it for physiological
reasons, for inflammation.
But you also do it for
psychological reasons.
Because you're
building resilience.
You're building
grit, also as well.
Recently, I was with
actor Will Smith.
And I was interviewing him.
And we were preparing.
He's like, so what
are you doing now?
I was like, I'm going to
read, finish this book.
And then I'm going
to go for a run.
And he's like, do you
do that every day?
I was like, yes, every
single day I read and I run.
I do something mentally.
And I do something physically.
And one of the shoots we
were doing was late at night.
It was filming late at night.
And I was like, wow, at
3:00, 4:00 in the morning,
how do you get ready,
just, you know,
when they say, OK, Will, you're
on set, how do you get ready?
He was like, Jim, I
don't have to get ready.
I stay ready.
I don't have to get ready.
And really, what
this tells me is
that when you live your purpose
and you're living your mission,
you're living what you
teach, really there's
a congruency there.
There's an alignment.
And people could feel that.
I believe that the
life that you live
are the lessons that we teach.
The life that we live
are the lessons we teach.
You have this thing in your--
speaking of learning,
children-- they don't
do what you tell them to do.
They do what you do, because
they have these things,
just like adults do,
called mirror neurons.
And mirror neurons are
these imitation neurons.
When you see something-- you're
watching a sporting event
or you're watching
a television show,
you can actually feel what
the main character feels,
because you have that
empathy, and that's
driven by your mirror neurons.
And so that's why
it's so important
to be around positive people--
people that challenge you,
your peer group.
Select the peer
group very carefully,
because they say you're the
average of the five people
you spend most time with.
Who you spend time
with is who you become.
And a big part of that
are the mirror neurons.
You start adopting
the same beliefs.
the same values.
When it comes to
your health, it's
not just your biological
networks or even
your neurological networks.
They're your social networks.
And so whether or not
you smoke has little
to do with your biology, but
does your friend's friend
smoke?
Because that all gets
imprinted on ourself.
And so when we're talking about
habits, a lot of my habits
get me in a place where
I feel uncomfortable.
I don't want to feel
comfortable being uncomfortable.
So another thing I do is I
have a tall glass of water,
because your body is 70% water.
Your brain is 70% water.
And you want to be
able to hydrate that.
Your brain is only about
2% of your body mass,
but it requires 20%
of the nutrients,
and so it requires that.
Make sure you're
completely hydrated.
So I'll do that and some
of my probiotics and so on.
I then I'll have a
brain power smoothie.
And you're thinking, what's
a brain power smoothie?
Well, I have my top 10
favorite brain foods,
because you are what you eat.
You are what you eat.
Literally what you
eat becomes you.
Especially the things
that you could actually
assimilate, not the food
that you can't assimilate.
So-- but maybe you are
what you assimilate
and can actually absorb.
But you are what you eat.
And so eat a good brain diet.
When I talk about the
brain, again, it's
because it's the control
center for your relationships,
for your career, for your
mission-- for all the things
that are important in your life.
And so some of my top 10
favorite brain foods--
avocados.
Very, very good for your brain.
Number two, I would
say blueberries.
I call them brain berries.
Number three, broccoli.
Your mom was right.
Broccoli is very
good for your brain.
After that, coconut oil.
Very, very good for your brain.
Eggs-- very good for your brain.
The essential fatty acids.
Green leafy vegetables--
very neuroprotective.
Wild salmon-- wild salmon.
We're talking about fish oils.
As so I would say, wild salmon.
Sardines-- very
good for the brain.
Turmeric-- extremely
Very anti-inflammatory.
And I like to make a
golden tea, if you will,
or a golden milk using turmeric.
You always put some
pepper in there,
because it helps you to be able
to absorb it better as well.
Some people like honey--
some almond milk as a base.
Very good.
Another great food for the
brain are actually walnuts.
Walnuts are very
good for your brain.
And even if you notice,
when you look at a walnut,
it looks like what?
It looks like the human brain.
Actually, in natures,
there's certain foods
that they actually communicate
what organs they serve.
So for example, if you take
a carrot and you cut it,
it actually looks
like an eyeball.
And so it's an
interesting signature
that nature has-- a signature.
A sign of nature--
they tell you the sign
of where it's going to heal.
Dark chocolate-- you know
I saved the best for last.
Dark chocolate-- the
darker, the better.
Anything that's going to
be good for your mood,
generally it's going to be good
for your mind also, as well.
So what I'll do
every morning is I'll
take some of my
favorite brain foods
and I'll throw them
into a blender.
So I'll put the avocados.
I'll put the
blueberries in there.
I'll put some
coconut oil in there.
I'll spit some green
leafy vegetables in there.
I'll put some soaked walnuts
in there, some dark chocolate.
I won't put the wild salmon
in there or the eggs,
but I make a brain
power smoothie.
And when I'm drinking
my brain power smoothie,
now what I'm doing
is I'm journaling.
And this is where I take time.
And my journaling has to do
with a lot around gratitude.
I list the things that
I'm most grateful for.
Because gratitude,
again, rewires the brain.
Because what you tend to
appreciate appreciates.
What you appreciate appreciates
and grows in your life.
And so I write
those things down.
Everything from the
fact that I could see,
the things with my physiology,
my health, the people,
my mission-- the people
I'm helping, also, as well.
I'm doing my gratitude journal.
And I'm also listing
also the things
that I want to do that day.
I do three things personally,
three things professionally.
Those are my wins for the day.
And notice, I don't
even check my email.
Because one of the
worst habits people
could have-- if they want to
be in a lead mental performer
and they want to reach
their fullest potential,
do not touch your phone
the first hour of the day.
And people-- and I'll say
this and a lot of people--
because we're all addicted
to our digital devices--
is because for two reasons.
Number one, it rewires
your brain, number one,
for distraction.
When you wake up first
thing in the morning,
you're in this brainwave
state called alpha theta.
Alpha theta states are the
states of relaxed awareness.
You're extremely impressionable.
And when you're going on your
smart devices, and every time
you get a like or a
share or a comment
or you're watching another
cat video, whatever, you're
getting this flood of dopamine.
But it's training you
to be more distracted.
And we know this right,
we live in a world
full of distractions.
App notifications,
social media alerts--
and it was designed, actually,
out of Stanford University.
Dr. BJ Fogg, who runs the
Influence Lab in Stanford
University-- one of his students
actually created Instagram.
And this is a
device that you're--
this is an app that we're
opening up 150, 200 times
a day.
Highly addictive,
highly habitual.
But his expertise is
in this area of habit.
Habit creation, if you will.
He has this formula
called B=MAT.
B equals M-A-T. And if you
want to change your habit,
it starts--
the behavior is
the habit itself.
Now, in order to be
able to change that,
what creates a habit
or a behavior is M-A-T.
M is motivation,
because you can't
change a habit unless
you're motivated to do so.
So for example, if you want to
make exercise a habit, eating
right a habit, journaling
or meditating a habit,
you need to check in
with your motivation.
On a scale of 0 to
10, where are you
in your level of
motivation-- your drive
to be able to do that
activity, if you will?
And the good thing
about this is,
if it's a five,
ask yourself, well,
what do I need to do in my mind
to make it a six or a seven?
And you could play
these little brain hack
games to be able to
level up, like it's
a video game inside your mind.
The A in this formula stands
for ability-- ability.
And you have
training in that area
to be able to do that behavior.
So going back to,
let's say your behavior
is you want to be able
to read every single day.
Do you have the ability to read?
Do you have
opportunities to read?
And finally, the T-- this is
the big one in the formula.
The T in B=MAT when creating
new habits stands for trigger.
And triggers are important to me
in my work as a memory expert,
because everything
serves as a reminder.
You can forget something
during the day.
You're like, what was
that actor's name?
Or what did I need to do?
And later on, you're
driving your car.
All of sudden, what happens?
It just pops in your mind.
Usually there's an
unconscious trigger--
maybe a song that
goes off or something
you see on the side of the road
that unconsciously reminded you
of the thing that's
inside of your mind
that you needed to
be able to recall.
But the trigger is
basically saying,
what prompts you
to do that habit?
So for example, I don't like
digital devices so much.
They're convenient,
but they also cripple.
And we have this thing
called digital dementia
where we're outsourcing our
brains to our smart devices.
Think about how many phone
numbers you knew growing up.
What?
All of them, right?
How many phone numbers
do you know right now?
One, maybe two.
And the challenge
is, is I don't want
to memorize hundreds
of phone numbers,
but we've lost the ability
just to memorize one.
They call it digital dementia.
Meaning that we're using our
smart devices so much to keep
our to-dos, our schedules,
our grocery list,
do simple math for us, remember
all the phone numbers--
so our brains lost
the ability to be
able to do those tasks ourself.
It's just like GPS.
I was talking to Dr. Daniel
Amen, the famous brain doctor.
He says, Jim, with
GPS, we're not
getting early
detection of dementia
because if you're relying
on a piece of technology
to tell you where
and when to turn,
you're not realizing when you
would have a memory lapse.
And you're not going to
doctors to get checked out.
So this is part of the digital
dementia, this growing--
I think there are
three major challenges
that the world's never faced
before in this digital age.
Number one is digital overload.
Too much information,
too little time.
The amount of information is
doubling at dizzying speeds.
The chairman of Google says
that the amount of information
that's been created from
the dawn of humanity
to the year 2003, which is
only about a decade and a half
ago-- that amount of information
now is created every two
days online.
Think about all the podcasts,
and all the blog posts,
and all the YouTube videos, and
all the books and everything--
so much information.
So it's doubling
at dizzying speeds.
But how we learn it--
has that changed?
How we learn it, how
we read it, how we
recall it-- has that changed?
Not at all.
So that growing gap creates
a big health concern
called information anxiety.
Higher blood pressure,
compression of leisure time,
more sleeplessness.
Even if people have some
free time or something
frees up in their
life-- a meeting
gets canceled-- they
can't even enjoy it,
because their mind is still
multitasking and thinking
of other things.
Because we're wired to be busy.
Because people all of the
time-- they say-- and you're
used to saying, I'm so busy.
And how is it today?
Oh, I'm just so busy.
And they're using that
as a badge of honor,
meaning it's an identity.
And they're seeing
themselves as busy in it.
But here's the challenge.
If you're seeing yourself and--
because here's the
unconscious message
you're sending to somebody.
When you're saying you're busy,
you're getting secondary gain.
And that secondary
gain sympathy,
or it's a feeling of
you're significant.
Because you're so busy,
you must be important.
And it's fulfilling these needs.
And so we are always
wanting to be busy,
if that's your identity.
But here's the disservice
you give yourself, is this.
If you're always
identifying with being busy,
you're going to organize
your life to always be busy.
And you wonder why you
don't have peace of mind.
You wonder why you
don't have a calmness.
Because I really think
that's the real currency,
is your attention,
is your presence,
is your confidence,
and this level
of calmness in an age of storms
with digital distractions.
So number one, digital overload
creates information anxiety.
That's why learning how to
learn faster is so important.
The other digital concern I
have is digital distraction--
this idea that nobody
can concentrate.
They say that human beings
now have less attention span
than a goldfish.
And it's a big challenge,
because how are you going
to build a quality of life?
How are you to get things
that are most important done
if you can't even focus on the
thing that's in front of you?
How many of us read a page
in a book, get to the end,
and just forgot
what we just read?
How many people are meeting
somebody for the first time,
and they don't remember a name?
Not because they don't
have a great memory.
It's because they're
looking over their shoulder
to see who else is important,
because they're not present.
How many people here, they're
not even-- looking around?
Even if they're looking at
you, they're not really there,
because they're
talking to themselves.
They're not listening.
They're waiting for
their turn to speak,
or they're thinking about
how they're going to respond.
And one of my very favorite
books is by Dr. Stephen Covey--
"The Seven Habits of
Highly Effective People."
And these are the
habits-- we're going back
to habits and routines of
the most effective people.
One of them says, seek
first to understand,
then to be understood.
Seek first to understand,
Like for example,
remembering names.
That's one of the biggest
memory challenges people have.
And really, it's
not your retention.
It's your attention.
It's your observation.
I remember I got to
spend some time recently
with President Bill Clinton.
And we're sitting at
a fundraiser together.
And I'd met him previously
before, just for a few minutes.
And he remembered my
name, after one meeting.
He remembered our
conversation that we had.
And that's a standout
skill, right?
Because most people
can't do that.
And I remember asking
him, President Clinton,
how do you do that?
And I'm a memory
expert, you know.
What memory techniques
are you using?
He says, Jim, I'm not
using a memory technique.
He said, growing up in
Arkansas, our grandfather
would tell stories
to all the children.
But afterwards, he would
do something different.
He would quiz each
of us separately
to see if we were
really paying attention.
And he tells me all
these wonderful stories.
And I notice when
he's talking to me,
he's really there with me.
He's not looking
over my shoulder
and seeing who else is here.
You could tell he's
really listening.
And it was so
interesting, because I
feel like his incredible memory
and the powerful presence
he has with people comes from
being powerfully present.
That his incredible memory
and his powerful presence
comes from being
powerfully present.
And we could all do that.
And when we're talking about
even just boosting our memory,
we're talking about
being motivated.
Going back to motivation.
Asking yourself, why do
you want to remember this?
Why do you want to remember
this person's name?
Maybe it's to make a
connection-- make a new friend
or create a business
relationship.
Maybe it's to practice
these techniques I learned.
Because here's the thing.
If you can't come up one reason,
you won't remember things.
Because reasons reap results.
Reasons reap results.
I think there's a
success formula.
I call it H Cubed.
Goes from your head to
your heart to your hands.
So we could visualize
things all day.
We could set goals all day.
We could have our
dreams in our mind.
But if we're not acting with
our hands, something's going on.
Something is missing,
because we're self-sabotaging
or we're procrastinating.
Why aren't we acting with our
hands when it's in our head?
Usually what's missing is the
second H, which is the heart.
The heart is a
symbol of emotion--
the energy of motion.
Because you can't steer
a car that has no fuel.
So where's the fuel?
You want to start with why.
And so we go back to motivation.
I remember I was doing a
training in Silicon Valley.
And when I was done, Bill
Gates comes up to me.
And we have this--
I always ask people what
their superpower is,
or if you have only one
superpower, what would it be.
And he says, oh, I would
love to read faster.
And I was like, oh, I could
totally help you with that.
And Warren Buffett
says, I probably
wasted 10 years of my
life reading slowly.
But we start talking about
the future of education.
And I take it from
a learning how
to learn perspective--
accelerated
learning perspective.
He takes it from more of
a technology perspective.
And somebody who was listening
to our conversation was saying,
is there anything missing?
You have the theory
and you have the tools.
And we talked
about it some more,
and we came up with
the same conclusion.
It's motivation.
Understanding human motivation.
Because here's the thing.
A lot of people know
what to do, but they
don't do what they know.
Because common sense is
not often common practice.
And usually, what's missing,
if you procrastinate and put
things off, is understanding
your emotions--
tapping into what's
most important to you.
Going back to your values,
going back to your beliefs,
going to thte things--
even sometimes it's their
fears that drive people
in terms of the things that
they're moving away from
or the things that they're
moving towards, also as well.
People come to me
all the time saying,
how do I unlock
my full potential?
And how can I be smarter?
How can I raise my intelligence?
How can I improve my memory?
And science is saying,
about 1/3 of your potential
and your intelligence,
your memory
is predetermined by
genetics and biology.
But that means 2/3 is
completely in your control.
And that's really exciting news.
And then there are 10 keys.
So there are 10 keys for
unlocking your full potential.
Number one is a good diet.
You are what you eat.
Literally, what you
eat becomes you.
So eat the best
brain foods ever.
Number two is Killing ANTS.
Killing ANTS is actually
clinically proven
to unlock your potential.
"ANTS" stands for automatic
negative thoughts--
automatic negative thoughts.
Because the truth is,
yes, you are what you eat,
but you are also your thoughts.
And so you want to
keep them positive.
You want to keep
them encouraging.
There are studies that
suggest that pessimists
are more accurate.
They're right more often.
But optimists
achieve a lot more.
And think about it,
because pessimists
are really risk-adverse,
so they play it safe.
And so they're not getting as
much done and accomplished.
But optimists are
taking more risks.
And with those
risks come rewards.
But when it comes to getting
rid of negative thoughts,
what I would tell
people as this.
Is remember magic.
Use your magic.
Abra-- A-B-R-A.
Remember abracadabra?
Abracadabra is all about taking
words and changing things--
transformational words.
So if you have a negative
talk, negative self-talk
and negative limiting
belief, what I want you to do
are four simple things.
The A in abra says acknowledge.
You acknowledge that.
So maybe you say something
like, oh, I'm just too old.
Or oh, I'm just--
this doesn't run in my family.
Or oh, I'm just not smart
enough or good enough.
Acknowledge it.
Don't resist it.
Because if you fight it,
what you resist persists.
So just acknowledge it.
The B in abra
stands for breathe.
It stands for breath.
Because what you do
is you breathe in.
And when I'm breathing,
I'm visualizing.
We're talking about
breath and visualization.
I breathe in potential.
I breathe in intelligence.
I breathe in limitless.
And I breathe into
the place of my body,
whether it's pain I'm suffering
from or struggling with
or an idea in my mind--
I breathe into that space.
And then the R in
abra is I release.
I release.
I release that
negative thought--
that automatic negative thought.
I release that pain.
I release limits out.
And finally, the last A
in abra stands for align--
align.
I reset.
I do zero base.
What's the opposite
of what I was feeling?
Or what's the opposite of
what I was saying to myself?
What's my true,
fullest potential?
And I align more
to my true nature.
Another thing you could
do to be able to unlock
your full potential is exercise.
So exercise is really
good for the brain.
As your body moves,
your brain grooves.
A lot of people don't know
this, but the primary function
of our brain is to
control our movement.
And here's what the latest
science is saying, is
just there's not only just a
brain-body connection-- there's
a body-brain connection.
The challenge is, is we're
so sedentary all the time.
We live in a very
sedentary culture.
They say sitting
is the new smoking.
And I encourage people
to take brain breaks.
The Pomodoro Technique
says that our focus--
we can only maintain high
focus for about 25 minutes.
After that, there's
a sharp decline.
And so what I do
is I set an alarm
to go off every 25 to 30
minutes-- maybe an hour, tops.
And then what I do is
I take a little brain
break-- a five-minute brain
break to do three things.
Number one, I hydrate.
Number two, I do deep breathing.
And the third thing
I do is I move.
As your body moves,
your brain grooves.
Another thing you could do
to maximize your potential
are nutrients-- are
supplements-- nutrients.
Especially when it
comes to your brain.
Because if you do
all the techniques,
but if you're deficient in
DHAs, omegas, your B vitamins,
it's going to affect
your performance.
So if you're not
getting the best diet,
you could supplement.
Number five is a
positive peer group.
Positive peer group is
really key to living
in your full
potential, because you
are who you spend time with.
Literally who you spend
time with is who you become.
After that, I would say
a clean environment.
Clean environment is
really good for your brain,
for you living your
fullest potential.
Because you know this.
If you ever clean your
desk or your laptop,
don't you have a more sharpness?
Don't you have
clarity of thought?
So a clean environment
is reflective of clarity
of thought.
Sleep-- this is the next one.
Number seven is sleep.
You need sleep, especially
for your mental performance,
for two reasons.
Number one, it's
where you consolidate
short- to long-term memory.
That's really key.
You need to consolidate
short to long memory.
That happens when you sleep.
Number two, though, it's where
you're cleaning out the plaque
that leads to dementia
and Alzheimer's.
Actually, when you sleep is
when you're actually doing that.
And then the third
reason-- a bonus reason--
is it's when you dream.
When you're in that
deep sleep and you're
dreaming-- we talked about the
power of all the amazing dreams
that you're having and being
able to remember them--
you have to make
sure you're dreaming.
The eighth key-- another key to
unlocking your full potential
is to protect your brain.
What do I mean?
Wear a helmet.
Your brain-- coming from
somebody who's had many
traumatic brain injuries,
falling off roofs headfirst
into radiators--
your brain is resilient,
but it's also very fragile.
So with you and your kids,
avoid the extreme sports.
Wear a helmet.
Wear your seat belt-- all those
things to protect your brain.
The next key for unlocking
your full mental potential
is new learnings.
Commit yourself to
lifelong learnings.
There was a study
done on super nuns.
It was on the cover
of "Time" magazine.
And they wanted to find out how
these women were living 80, 90,
and above in age.
And they found
out, half of it had
to do with their
gratitude-- going back
to gratitude and faith.
The other half, though,
had to do with they
were lifelong learners.
They were committed
to lifelong learning,
learning every single day.
Because we've discovered
more about the human brain--
more in the past 20 years
than the previous 2,000 years.
With studies done neurogenesis
and neuroplasticity,
neurogenesis says--
"neuro" meaning the brain,
"genesis" meaning birth.
You could give birth to new
brain cells to the day you die.
Neuroplasticity-- this
is really exciting-- says
that your brain is like
plastic, in a positive way.
Meaning it's very malleable--
that having a new thought
creates new connections.
So for example, Einstein's brain
wasn't any bigger than anybody
else's.
If anything, it's smaller.
But there are certain
parts of his brain
that are extremely
dense, because he
wired his brain through his what
he called thought experiments.
He would visualize himself
riding a beam of light,
looking at something and
wondering what that thing would
look like going at light speed.
He would do these
thought experiments.
He's the one that
said imagination is
more powerful than knowledge.
Because knowledge is what it is.
But imagination is
what things could be.
So commit yourself
to lifelong learning.
And what stimulates neurogenesis
and neuroplasticity?
Two things.
Novelty and nutrition.
It's just like if you want to
build your physical muscles.
If you want to build a
muscle, you give it novelty.
You work it out.
You give it exercise.
And then you give in
nutrients to feed it.
Same thing with
your mental muscles.
Give it novelty-- new--
things and then give it
the nutrients it
needs to develop.
And finally, the last
key for unlocking
your full mental potential
is stress management.
And this is a huge one,
because a lot of people--
because we live in such
stressed lives, we're like fish.
We don't see the water,
because we're in the water
all the time.
And we are living in
that sympathetic state.
And it's so important
for your brain
to down-regulate-- to spend time
in those parasympathetic places
where you rest and you
recover and you restore.
So in terms of
stress management,
what kind of
practices do we have?
Whether it's massage, whether--
for me, it's meditation.
So meditation is a
very powerful way.
When you meditate, you go
into this brainwave state
called alpha.
Alpha state is the state
of a relaxed awareness.
And relaxed awareness
is where you
could train yourself actually
to learn a language faster--
to be able to learn rapidly,
because your conscious mind is
actually set aside and you
just absorb information faster.
You know what puts you
into an alpha state is TV--
television.
They call it television
programming for a reason.
And you know this
because if you've ever
seen somebody so enthralled with
a TV show or a sporting event,
and you're trying to talk to
them or have a conversation,
and they're just in trance--
literally, they don't hear you.
It's because their
conscious mind is set aside
and they're just absorbing
what's in front of them.
And there are many ways to get
into an alpha state by design.
And I would recommend, use
all three learning styles--
visual, auditory,
and kinesthetic.
So when you visualize
things and you--
so when you visualize things and
you exercise your imagination,
it actually puts you
into an alpha state--
a relaxed state of awareness.
And even if you can't
imagine something
when you're imagining, just
imagine you can imagine it.
The auditory part is music.
Certain sounds,
like nature sounds,
will put you into
an alpha state.
Certain sounds, like
classical music, especially
Baroque classical music--
Vivaldi, Handel-- because
it's 60 beats per minute
and it harmonizes with
the resting heart rate.
So 60 beats per
minute Baroque music
will help put you into a
meditative alpha state.
And finally visual
auditory kinesthetic.
Kinesthetic, I would
say deep breathing.
Deep, diaphragmatic,
conscious breathing.
And even when you're not
meditating, a lot of people
have bad posture.
And when they're reading
something and they're studying,
you can't live
your full potential
if you're crouched
down like this.
Because when you
have poor posture,
you collapse your lungs.
And the lower 1/3 of your lungs
absorbs 2/3 of the oxygen.
And what's most important is
that oxygen gets to your brain.
So if you suffer from
mental fatigue or brain fog,
the number-one
thing you could do
is do deep,
diaphragmatic breathing.
And that's interesting, because
when you think about hypnosis--
on a side bar, a really good
hypnotherapist will take you
through visualization.
They'll also have some kind
of music in the background.
And then in terms
of relaxing music
and kinesthetic, deep,
diaphragmatic breathing--
it's visual,
auditory kinesthetic
and you can go deeper in
terms of those alpha states.
>> No, it is.
It's true.
And hypnotherapy can
be really powerful.
My dad actually used it,
because he was not well
for a number of years.
And we helped him get
well, and hypnotherapy
was part of the training
later on in the process.
>> It's huge.
They've done hypnotherapy with--
they'll take people through
an age regression process,
so when they were
nine years old.
And they could actually
read the signs off the road
when the family vacations.
They'll do age
regression therapy
where they'll take them back
to when they're seven or eight,
nine years old.
And they'll be able
remember with 95% accuracy
what day their ninth
birthday fell on.
Like what day of the week.
Because all that genius
is inside of you.
What I would say
to people is this.
I compare your life to an egg.
That if an egg is broken by
an outside force, life ends.
But if it's broken by an
inside force, life begins.
All great things
begin on the inside.
You have genius inside of you.
You have greatness
inside of you.
Now is the time to unlock it.
It's not how smart you are
or how smart your kids are.
It's, how are they smart?
Is that how smart you are.
It's, how are you smart?
But traditional education--
we all grew up--
See, one of the reasons
why that keeps us
from living our
fullest potential
is that we all grew up with
a 20th century education.
And a 20th century
education prepared us
for a 20th century world, which
was following orders, working
on farms, working in factories.
It was assembly line, cookie
cutter, one-size-fits-all,
sit quietly by yourself,
don't talk to your neighbor.
But we live in an age--
we're talking about
Elon Musk, right?
Autonomous electric
cars, and spaceships that
are going to Mars.
But our vehicle of choice
when it comes to learning
is like a horse and buggy.
Nobody's trained us on
how to learn how to learn.
Nobody's trained us on how
to unlock our natural powers.
And I believe that there's
a superhero in all of us.
I call it the superhero you.
Is the best version
of ourselves.
And the thing with
superheroes is not just
about discovering and
developing your superpowers.
That's part of it.
You want to discover and develop
your natural superpowers.
When I say superpowers, I
mean not shooting lasers out
of your eyes.
I mean your unique
ability-- your strength.
What are your talents?
Because your uniqueness
is your superpower.
But just having a superpower
doesn't make you a superhero.
You have to use that
superpower for what?
For good.
You have to use it to save
the world-- to make an impact.
Because that's the two
reasons to learn anything.
Number one, you learn it for
how it could benefit you.
But the other reason you
want to learn something
is so you can pay it forward
and help somebody else.
The reason why I
talk about memory
so much when it comes to
unlocking your full potential
is I believe that memory
really is who we are.
My grandmother passed away.
When she died, she didn't
recognize who I was.
She had Alzheimer's.
And going to her and
wanting to comfort her,
especially with my broken
brain, and I already felt like I
wasn't--
there was something
wrong with me.
When she didn't
remember my name,
it really affected
my life, because it's
an inflection point.
One experience can
make you take one step.
And one step in
another direction
changes your destination
or your destiny.
And I believe memory is
so important, because it's
the superpower we all have.
But when we lose it, we
lose part of who we are.
And it's not just remembering
facts and figures and formulas.
That's easy.
But it's the three L's
that I really focus on.
If you want to
build your memory--
you want to have your
memory because you want
to remember your loved ones--
the people that matter
the most to you.
But you also-- the
second L is your life.
Because if your life
is worth living,
it's worth remembering--
those special moments.
And the third L that you
want to be able to remember
are your lessons.
We hear this quote
all the time--
this definition of insanity.
Insanity is doing the same thing
over and over and over again,
but expecting a
different result.
I don't think that's insanity.
I think that's a poor memory.
That's a bad memory.
We tend to repeat things
over and over again.
Financially-- when
we spend money
the same way and we end up
making the same mistakes.
We end up dating the same
people over and over again,
because we lose the
memory and the remembrance
of that experience
when it hurt us.
Or maybe even when it comes
to our career or our diet.
We start eating the same bad
foods, because of our memory.
We don't remember
how bad we felt
when we ate that processed food
or that gluten-rich dessert
or that fried whatever.
And so the goal here
is to be able to--
I really do believe that
your life transforms.
If you want to live
your full potential,
be the best version
of yourself, you
have to identify more with a
thermostat than a thermometer.
What do I mean by that?
A thermometer-- the primary
function of the thermometer
is it reacts to the environment.
It literally reacts
to environment.
Whatever the environment
is giving it,
it just reflects that.
But a thermostat is different.
A thermostat sets a standard.
It sets a vision.
It sets a goal.
It uses this imagination.
And all a sudden and what
happens to the environment?
The environment
raises to become that.
And that's really what the
world needs today, are leaders.
Leaders committed to
learning and to giving.
And that's what
modern-day superheroes do.
The modern-day superheroes, what
they get people is this hope.
Because when you
have the courage
to be the best
version of yourself,
you give people unconsciously
that same permission
to do the same.
And that's really
what the world needs,
is a world full of superheroes.
So if your life is worth
living, it's worth remembering.
And as I look at my life
from where it began,
from immigrant parents
to having my head injury,
to be made fun of, to go
through all the bullying,
to feel like I'm not enough,
to not knowing how to read,
to searching for my
superhero school as a child,
to be made fun of
because I couldn't public
speak or I couldn't learn
like everybody else does--
to be going from the boy
with the broken brain,
and taking that whole
mess and making it
your message and your mission.
Where now, it's no
brain left behind.
Because I know--
the reason why I
talk about the brain
and the human mind
is we live in the
millennium of the mind.
Nobody here is paid
for their muscle power.
You're paid for your mind power.
It's not your brute strength.
It's your brain strength.
But when you can align
this with this with this--
your head, your heart your
hands-- magical things
could happen.
Now, I feel so blessed.
We talk about the power of
gratitude rewiring our brain.
Every single day, when I wake
up and I read these stories,
whether it's a child with
learning disabilities
to seniors that feel
like that they're aging
is really hurting them to some
of the modern day superheroes
in the world that
I respect, that I
love learning from--
the superheroes
that I've been seeking.
To be able to
coach them and work
with them and their
families and their teams--
I love to be able
to impact people who
are inspiring everybody.
And I think we all have
that ability when we take
the responsibility to do so.
When we take-- going
back to Stan Lee saying,
with great power comes
great responsibility.
I believe that with
great responsibility
comes great power.
When we take responsibility
for our lot in life,
we have great power to change
our lives and the lives
of everyone around us.
Change our brain,
we change our life.
Change our brain, we
could change the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]